Initially, let us say thank you from HDA to the Heritage Lottery Wales for their support
in enabling us to undertake this series of podcasts.
This podcast is about the Glamorganshire Canal.
The Glamorganshire Canal in South Wales first started in 1790 and the reason it is relevant
to Bute Town is that is where it ended up.
And a lot of people don't know where it is now.
But nonetheless, it ran from Merthyr down to Cardiff and the sea.
In 1794 the canal was opened between Cardiff and Merthyr over the mountains of South Wales.
This was considered fairly wondrous at the time.
Within 24.5 miles it rose to a height of 300 meters requiring 49 locks.
As you will understand what a lock does.
The lock controls levels.
So every time a canal barge now or then goes through a lock, two lock gates close.
One behind it, one in front of it.
And if it is travelling to Cardiff from Merthyr, every time that happened it dropped in height
and came out the other gate lower than the original height.
So it is important to think of lock gates as a series of stairs, steps so to speak.
So when the canal was opened in 1794 Cardiff had a population of just 4,000 people.
And in 1798 the canal was extended one mile seaward and included a sea lock.
The total cost of building the canal was £103,600.
The hills and valleys surrounding Merthyr were rich with limestone, iron ore and coal.
The canal predominantly followed the route of the River Tath and was able to carry these
raw materials and finished goods from the four Merthyr ironworks far more cheaply and
quickly than the previous method which was mule train.
Merthyr at the time was the largest town in Wales.
That was in 1850.
It was twice the size of its nearest rival Swansea and greater than the combined populations
of Swansea and Cardiff.
Merthyr's growth was brought about due to the expansion of the iron industry.
It was the industrial heart of Wales.
The four great ironworks, Dowlus, Penadarren, Plymouth and Caerphartha were able to transport
their finished iron on a single barge 9 foot wide and 60 foot long.
24 tonnes of iron could be towed by one horse needing only one man and a boy to run it efficiently.
These round trips in Cardiff could be completed in a fortnight.
Previously the tonnage required 48 horses, 12 men, 12 boys and would take significantly
longer.
Despite the railway boom in the 1840s and the opening of Bute Docks in Cardiff the canal
continued to flourish.
The Industrial Revolution, especially the coal boom in South Wales, saw unprecedented
growth of trade on the canal.
In 1858 at its economic peak the canal transported 467,000 tonnes of coal.
Within a decade this had slowed considerably.
The canal was a victim of its own success.
The trade boom and subsequent congestion was the primary cause of its decline.
Richard Crochet, owner of the Carpatho Ironworks, had the canal built to his ironworks in Merthyr.
He then opposed all efforts from the three other ironworks owners to do the same.
They tried to extend the canal or allow feeders to be built and this eventually led to the
setting up of the Taff Vale Railway Company by the three other iron masters to transport
their wares to Cardiff.
By 1888 the canal was owned by Lord Bute.
Lord Bute planned to use much of the canal on which to build a railway.
Its economic life was effectively over.
Although sand dredges and timber floats carried on using parts of the canal until 1942.
There are very little remains of the canal in Cardiff today.
The exception is the Glamorganshire Canal Nature Reserve at Corryton adjacent to junction 32 of the M4,
some five miles from Cardiff Docks.
The one kilometre stretch of the canal was lovingly restored in the 1960s.
And that's the only jewel of the canal and that's in Forest Farm Country Park.
Today limited traces of the canal remain.
About one half being covered by the A470 Cardiff to Merthyr Tydfil Drunk Road which was constructed
in the 1970s.
Much of the Taff trail between Abercunnan and Merthyr Tydfil follows the line of the canal.
A section from Tanguinalis to the Melingrefeth Tin Plateworks at Wychurch has been retained
in water and was used for fishing but is now the Glamorganshire Canal Local Nature Reserve.
In addition there are a few bridges and locks which have not been destroyed.
There's also a short stretch in water at 19 Gale Bush and at locks 31 and 32 in Pontypriddh.
A boat weighing machine, one of only four known to have existed on British canals,
was originally installed at Tanguinalis and was later moved to North Road Cardiff.
The machine was presented to the British Transport Commission in 1955 and was re-erected at the
Stoke-Burn Canal Museum in Northamptonshire.
In 2013 it was moved to the National Waterfront Museum in Swansea.
Let's briefly consider another very very important building, very near the North Norwegian Church,
the Pierhead building.
Bright red it appears in every single photograph.
It's grade one listed and it's built in what is now Cardiff Bay, Wales but of course was
on the docks.
It was originally built in 1897 as the headquarters for the Bute Dock Company.
It's now part of the estate of Senedd Cymru, the Welsh Parliament, which also includes
the Senedd Building at Teowel.
The clock on the building is unofficially known as Baby Big Ben or the Big Ben of Wales.
The building was built by the English architect William Frame and it was a replacement for
the headquarters of the Bute Docks Company which burnt down in 1892.
The Bute Dock Company was renamed Cardiff Railway Company in 1897.
A coat of arms on the building façade bears the company motto, The Water and Fire, by
Water and Fire.
The building became the administrative office to the Port of Cardiff in 1947.
There are a number of other listed buildings in Cardiff Bay and the Docklands which give
you a sense of the opulence and wealth that existed in Cardiff Docks.
Much of what you now sit on, if you're at that end of Butetown and Cardiff, actually
never existed because it was underwater and the docks were filled.
For a lot of children from Butetown, going back to the Glamourne
Chiew Canal, their memories are very clear of it.
I say children, I mean those in their 60s, 70s, 80s.
They remember swimming in the canal, making boats, remember some of their friends drowning
in there.
So, Glamourne Chiew Canal was a significantly important part of the growth of the docks.
But the thing that I find most interesting in a lot of ways is that when it was first
opened Merthyr was the biggest town in Wales.
And I will continually restate this point.
And then thanks in part to the vision and the wealth of Lord Bute and a number of iron
work companies, but largely, in my opinion, to the sweat of the miners at one end, the
iron workers at one end, and at the other end, the merchant seamen and dock workers.
Cardiff grew beyond Merthyr, beyond Swansea, and became the capital of Wales.
So that's just a brief explanation of the Glamourne Chiew Canal and the Pierhead building.